[WFLY-17110] Add Elytron WildFly Security Manager documentation (#16148)
wildfly/wildfly: docs/src/main/asciidoc/_elytron/Elytron_WildFly_Java_Security_Manager.adoc

* Output of debug information to detect missing permissions.
* Output of trace information to analyse special situations with {oracle-javadoc}/java.base/java/security/ProtectionDomain.html[protection domains], classloaders, and {oracle-javadoc}/java.base/java/security/CodeSource.html[codesources].

==== Why Run with the Java Security Manager Enabled?
Running a JSM will not fully protect the server from malicious features of untrusted code. It does, however, offer another layer of protection which can help reduce the impact of serious security vulnerabilities, such as deserialization attacks. For example, most of the recent https://www.github.com/mbechler/marshalsec/blob/master/marshalsec.pdf?raw=true[attacks against Jackson Databind] rely on making a Socket connection to an attacker-controlled JNDI Server to load malicious code. https://access.redhat.com/solutions/3279231[This article] provides information on how this issue potentially affects an application written for JBoss EAP, which would be same for WildFly. The Security Manager could block the socket creation, and potentially thwart the attack.

==== JavaSE 17 Deprecate the Security Manager for Removal

> Unfortunately the community decided to deprecate the Java Security Manager with Java 17. The full details are described in https://openjdk.org/jeps/411[JEP 411: Deprecate the Security Manager for Removal]. WildFly {wildflyversion} still tests and actively supports the Security Manager. Especially for enterprise java security there is no better tool in place or development. WildFly developers still recommend to activate the JSM for production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately the community decided to deprecate the Java Security Manager with Java 17. The full details are described in https://openjdk.org/jeps/411[JEP 411: Deprecate the Security Manager for Removal]. WildFly {wildflyversion} still tests and actively supports the Security Manager. Used in conjunction with other tools such as [Serialization Filtering](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/16/core/serialization-filtering1.html#GUID-3ECB288D-E5BD-4412-892F-E9BB11D4C98A) the JSM is still a good defense in depth measure.
```

[[Elytron_Java_Security_Manager]]
= Elytron WildFly Java Security Manager

== Overview

=== General introduction

> The Elytron WildFly Java Security Manager ist build on top of and within the https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/security/java-se-platform-security-architecture.html[Java SE Platform Security Architecture].

Reviewer 2: s/ist/is

The WildFly modules case is slightly special as all the modules just get granted AllPermission, so we end up in a situation where deployments have a defined set of permissions and our modules have all - by default the security manager checks the permissions of both of these during a permission check that spans them - our module will of course always pass.

Because of our model it is easy to get into the assumption that it is the doPrivileged call which is doing something special to bypass the security manager permissions check, it is not - all it is doing is dropping the protection domains from the call stack prior to that point, so we just end up with the protection domains for our modules on the call stack which have the all permission.

So where you say the current protection domain where the dependency is has all permissions granted - yes that is it - the remaining protections domains on the call stack have the appropriate permissions granted.

> When I read about it, I had always been understanding that the doPriviledge does some magical things that allowed your code run as trusted code that can bypass the permissions, for example at https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/security/java-se-platform-security-architecture.html#GUID-73F600BE-8098-4613-AD4B-E2DEFB9118D8[What It Means to Have Privileged Code], with sentences as:

Reviewer 2: @boris-unckel Thank you for the updates! 

Just a minor, but would you be able to change slighty the style of these last chapters? Since this was taken from zulip it reads more like a conversation instead of documentation. WDYT?

Author: Ok, I assume you mean to switch from "our"/"we"... to a passive form. I was afraid my English leads to worse result but you're right - it must be a documentation style wording.

Reviewer 2: Yes, documentation style wording would be best. Also removing the question/answer style would be good. So taht the documentation is compact. Thank you!

Author: @Skyllarr Done, hopefully correct

Reviewer 2: @boris-unckel Great, thank you! It reads much better now! I just added some remaining suggestions

==== Permission checks
As a call progresses from class to class, module to module, deployment to module a list of all of the protection domains of each of these builds up.
When a permission check is performed it will only success if each and every protection domain on the call stack has been granted the permission.

This is where doPrivileged comes in, this is effectively saying "I have verified this is safe, forget the protection domains that called me."
So when a deployment calls into a server module and that server module calls doPrivileged then the deployments module will not longer be a part of the permission check.

Adding a doPrivileged seems an obvious solution but when added we also need to think about how deployments could abuse this to get their protection domain dropped from the permissions check.

==== Privileged blocks in dependencies
Adding the privileged block in a dependency used by WildFly works because the protection domain of the server modules has all the permissions I mean, is it because the current protection domain where the dependency is has all permissions granted, or is it because it is running on a privileged block?

> One point to start with there is nothing special about a PrivilegedAction - it is just a special interface which allows some form of Runnable to be passed in which also has a return type. If this was added later they could have just used the functional interfaces. The special part is the doPrivileged call.

Author: > PrivilegedAction is an interface which allows a `Runnable` class to be passed in and also has a return type.

Fixed (not yet pushed)

> Also in this sentence: `If this was added later they could have just used the functional interfaces. ` who is they?

If this was added later it could have been implemented with the functional interfaces.

Under normal circumstances every jar would be represented by it's own protection domain and each jar could be assigned it's own permissions. When the security manager performs it's permissions check it would make sure every protection domain in the call stack has been granted that permission.

> Our case is slightly special as all of our modules just get granted AllPermission, so we end up in a situation where deployments have a defined set of permissions and our modules have all - by default the security manager checks the permissions of both of these during a permission check that spans them - our module will of course always pass.

Reviewer 2: @boris-unckel  I know this is taken from zulip. But when reading this documentation it is not clear what "our case" mean

Author: ```The WildFly modules case is``` ...

The Java Enterprise Edition (EE) 7 specification introduced a new feature which allows application developers to specify a Java Security Manager (JSM) policy for their Java EE applications, when deployed to a compliant Java EE Application Server such as WildFly. Until now, writing JSM policies has been pretty tedious. Now a new tool has been developed which allows the generation of a JSM policy for deployments running on WildFly. It is possible that running with JSM enabled may affect performance, https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8043631[JEP 232] indicates the performance impact would be 10-15%, but it is still recommended to test the impact per application.

Elytron WildFly Java Security Manager basic enhancements are

* Support of JavaEE 7 (and newer) https://www.oracle.com/webfolder/technetwork/jsc/xml/ns/javaee/permissions_7.xsd[Java EE application permissions schema] to allow declarative security per application deployment.
* Support of minimum and maximum permissions per server instance.
* Support of a "log-only" mode to ease development and testing of permissions.
* Output of debug information to detect missing permissions.

> * Output of trace information to analyse special situations with {oracle-javadoc}/java.base/java/security/ProtectionDomain.html[protection domains], classloaders, and {oracle-javadoc}/java.base/java/security/CodeSource.html[codesources].

Reviewer 2: @boris-unckel  Just a minor, the links do not render properly

==== Why Run with the Java Security Manager Enabled?
Running a JSM will not fully protect the server from malicious attackers exploiting security vulnerabilities. It does, however, offer another layer of protection which can help reduce the impact of serious security vulnerabilities, such as deserialization attacks. For example, most of the recent https://www.github.com/mbechler/marshalsec/blob/master/marshalsec.pdf?raw=true[attacks against Jackson Databind] rely on making a Socket connection to an attacker-controlled JNDI Server to load malicious code. https://access.redhat.com/solutions/3279231[This article] provides information on how this issue potentially affects an application written for JBoss EAP, which would be same for WildFly. The Security Manager could block the socket creation, and potentially thwart the attack.

==== JavaSE 17 Deprecate the Security Manager for Removal

> Unfortunately the community decided to deprecate the Java Security Manager with Java 17. The full details are described in https://openjdk.org/jeps/411[JEP 411: Deprecate the Security Manager for Removal]. WildFly {wildflyversion} still tests and actively supports the Security Manager. Used in conjunction with other tools such as [Serialization Filtering](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/core/serialization-filtering1.html#GUID-3ECB288D-E5BD-4412-892F-E9BB11D4C98A) the JSM is still a good defense in depth measure.

Reviewer 2: Just a minor, I would not use the word `unfortunately` in documentation as it is just an opinion and would depend on the context? And the links do not render well here

[[Elytron_JSM_Log-ony_mode]]
=== Log-only mode
The log-only mode could be described as JSM simulation mode: Every permission check will be done but the result will not be propagated to the system - no SecurityException will be thrown. It is _NOT_ about enabling or disabling log entries, which is solely driven by the logging configuration. The log-only mode is controlled with the `-Dorg.wildfly.security.manager.log-only` option. *The default is false.*
[source,sh,options="nowrap"]
----
./standalone.sh -secmgr -Dorg.wildfly.security.manager.log-only=true
----
Do _NOT_ use this option in production environments.

[[Elytron_JSM_logging_debug_trace]]
=== Logging Debug and trace

You can find a detailed description and how to about the command line interface and the logging configuration in the link:Admin_Guide{outfilesuffix}[Admin Guide]. The logger name to configure for the Elytron WildFly Security Manager is ```org.wildfly.security.access```.

==== WildFly Security Manager Debug logging

> Debug is enabled via the following CLI

Reviewer 2: Debug is enabled via the following CLI commands

==== Logging Profiles
If you are using one or more logging profiles it is strongly recommended to configure the `org.wildfly.security.access` logger for the server _AND_ all logging profiles. If not, you might miss a relevant output.

[[Elytron_JSM_min_max_permissions]]
=== Minimum and maximum permissions
The ```security-manager``` subsystem configures a maximum-set with the ```AllPermission``` by default:
[source,xml,options="nowrap"]
----
            <deployment-permissions>
                <maximum-set>
                    <permission class="java.security.AllPermission"/>
                </maximum-set>
            </deployment-permissions>
----
If you cannot configure a third-party blackbox deployment unit or you want to share a common set of permissions across multiple deployments you can add a ```minimum-set``` of permissions.
You could modify the ```maximum-set```, remove the AllPermission and setup further restrictions to permissions you are willing to grant to deployments.

[[Elytron_JSM_permissions_xml_property_replacement]]
=== Property replacement in permissions.xml

> https://github.com/wildfly/wildfly-proposals/blob/main/ee/WFCORE_2147_Wildfly_core_descriptor_based_property_replacement.adoc#enabledisable-descriptor-based-property-replacement-for-files-parsed-by-wildfly-core[Expression resolution in EE security manager deployment descriptors] (permissions.xml and jboss-permissions.xml) is supported since WildFly 19. You can use the familiar ```${foo:true}``` syntax in these deployment descriptors to allow customization of settings at runtime.

Reviewer 2: We should use link to the documentation and not link to the proposal if available

Author: Thanks, found it - fixed.
